README.md, before:

# Rust parser and interpreter for the MAFL language

## Why you should not use this language

This project is not meant for production. It's not even meant for any type of productive work. I made it because I wanted to experiment with some Rust crates and needed a good project to motivate me. A scripting language was a good motivator.

There are many much better scripting languages for Rust. Some of them are very solid production-level projects. Use those instead unless you want to play with something a bit weird and different. I recommend ``Lua`` if you want something that is used outside of the Rust world or ``Rhai`` and ``Rune`` if you want a better Rust integration. They have different objectives but they are all much much better than my language.

Note that the current implementation of MAFL is really small: on X86_64, the release binary is less than 3MB stripped with uncompressed standard library embedded and garbage collector enabled. It might be useful in a non-production project if something very small is needed, although I'm pretty sure you can make ``Rhai`` very small too by disabling a lot of features.

## Pest and Nom

I started this project because I wanted to experiment with a ``pest`` grammar after working with ``nom`` for a while. Having the grammar as a separate entity is nice but I also like the ``nom`` approach of combining the grammar with the parsing logic. With ``pest``, changing the grammar often means also having to change your parser code. With ``nom`` they are integrated so you make a single change. When it's possible to change the ``pest`` grammar without having to change the parser code, that's when the separation is interesting (ex: changing the separators in an ``if then else`` statement). In general, a ``pest`` grammar file is easier to read and modify.

## Garbage collector

I wanted to test the ``Gc`` crate for Rust. I usually don't need a garbage collector when working in Rust. ``Rc`` and ``Arc`` are more than enough for my needs most of the time when the borrow checker prevents me from using certain data structures. So I deliberately introduced circular references in my language and made them necessary for certain things by design (it has recursive closures). The garbage collector became essential and I learned a lot by using ``Gc``. My performance took a significant hit so I left it as a cargo feature that is enabled by default. The language can fall back to using ``Rc`` but it will leak memory if you use circular structures.
Dealing with circular references was also very interesting when it came to printing and traversal in general.

## Embeddable functional scripting tool

MAFL can be used to write "smart" config files or scripts for a compiled Rust program. The scripts can call back to the Rust code via custom functions.
Rust can send data into the script and recover a result value or even the full execution context.
As I said before, there are better tools for this, but I wanted my little experiment to support this functionality.
There is still a lot of work to be done at the boundary layer to make passing data to and from Rust more transparent. 
Same with registering custom functions. ``Rhai`` does this very elegantly. In MAFL it's still very clumsy but it works.

## Having fun

I wanted to have some fun while learning about parsing and interpreting a language and also using Rust smart pointers and garbage collection. 
Keeping the language as functional as possible without being purely functional was an important objective because I like the functional aspects of Rust.
Mutability and aliasing are part of MAFL so it's not a pure language and it's certainly not as safe as Rust.

Having fun was more important to me than making a useful language. This means that the design of the MAFL programming language is far from perfect.

Performance is not very good: i'm using a tree-walking interpreter and although I experimented with some performance-enhancing optimizations, that was not my main goal. At some point, I had a caching layer to speed up variable name lookups in one of my experimental branches but it was never integrated fully.

Functions are the main compound type in MAFL. 
They are used to run code but also as objects and modules (via closures). 
The only exception to this is arrays. 
At first, I tried using functions for arrays but decided to have a dedicated type instead.

By default, lexical binding is used. Closures are the main element in the language but the language also supports
special dynamic functions that expand at the call site. It has an @eval builtin that allows the execution
of a string as a program in the current context.

It would probably have been simpler and more efficient to use custom structured types (struct, class, object, etc...) than
to use the closure paradigm for everything. I went for a model that was more fun to work with for me.

In a lot of places in the language, storage cells can be multiply aliased, either by captured environments inside closures or by explicit reference objects.
That's obviously not good practice, especially coming from Rust that forbids multiple mutable borrows, but it was fun to play with and forced the use of runtime smart pointers (``Rc``) and later full gargage collected smart pointers (``Gc``) when cycles were introduced.

Currying is fully supported. That was very important to me. The language uses a declaration style without parentheses but function calls
use parentheses (makes it easier to call zero-argument functions). Function calls can be chained and the language re-arranges the arguments as they need to be consumed.

I enjoy writing code in this language because it's sometimes very challenging given some of the design choices. Once again, fun was a very important part of this project, much more than making something practical. 
If I need to write good code for work with a scripting component, I would almost certainly use something like ``Rhai`` and not MAFL unless I need garbage collected cyclic data.

## Examples

Refer to [mafl/language.mafl](mafl/language.mafl) for a walkthrough of the MAFL language as a long MAFL program.

A first functional example: the fun keyword is used to create closures (lambdas). It can be replaced with a more compact form with backslash.

```
let arr = [1,2,3,4];
let f = fun x xs { 
    @println(
        map(add(2),xs),
        map(flip(div,2),xs)
    ); # 2 results printed
    fold(\x,y{x/2+y*5},x,xs) # no semicolon at end (implicit return from the function)
};
f(10,arr) # no semicolon at end (implicit return from the program)
```
produces the following output:

```
[3, 4, 5, 6] [0.5, 1, 1.5, 2]

*** Program result as a value:
31.25
```

Functions (closures) as objects: cons is a fun that returns its captured state as an object (object factory). 
module is like a zero-arg cons that is called immediately (instance creator).

```
let common = module {
    let x = 10;
};

let builder = cons i1 i2 {
    from common use x;
    let y = i1;
    let z = i2;
    let advance = fun n {
        z = z + y + x;
        x += n;
        y *= n;
    };
    let reset = fun {
        y = i1;
        z = i2;
    };
    let to_string = fun {
        "State(" + x + "," + y + "," + z + ")"
    };
    forget i1 i2;
};

let state1 = builder(1,2);
# at this point state1 is an object containing
# - x: aliased to the x inside common
# - y,z: internal to state1 (values 1 and 2)
# - 3 methods: advance, reset and to_string (called by @println)
# - no i1 or i2 because we forgot them
# but the reset method has captured i1 and i2 in a closure and can use them
# even if the parent forgets them.

let state2 = builder(4,8);
# another instance (with x shared through common)

@println(state1);
@println(state2);

state1.x += 1;

test common.x expect 11;
test state1.x expect 11;
test state2.x expect 11;

@println(state2);
state2.advance(2);
@println(state2);
state2.advance(2);
@println(state2);

test common.x expect 15;
test state1.x expect 15;
test state2.x expect 15;

@println(state1);
@println(state2);

state2.reset();
@println(state1);
@println(state2);
```
produces the following output:

```
State(10,1,2)
State(10,4,8)
# test passed common.x: result 11
# test passed state1.x: result 11
# test passed state2.x: result 11
State(11,4,8)
State(13,8,23)
State(15,16,44)
# test passed common.x: result 15
# test passed state1.x: result 15
# test passed state2.x: result 15
State(15,1,2)
State(15,16,44)
State(15,1,2)
State(15,4,8)
```


A more advanced script example: [mafl/list.mafl](mafl/list.mafl). This one contains a module that implements linked lists using our only object datatype: closures. It really shows how MAFL is different. List nodes (objects) are built out of function closures. A few useful methods are implemented on the returned objects. This example is interesting because it shows how to dynamically construct objects in MAFL with data and methods. It also shows how to use ``forget`` to make functions private.


[mafl/xor_nn.mafl](mafl/xor_nn.mafl) shows how to train a very small neural network. It's probably the last thing you should be doing with a slow language like MAFL. It makes interpreted Python look fast. Some of my experimental branches had optimisations that made this example up to 5x faster. Variable name lookups are very slow in MAFL when not optimized or cached. Since my goal was not high speed for tight loops with math operations, I abandoned the experimental branches. 


## The interpreter


The interpreter takes the following command line arguments:
1) an optional argument: -p (print result with @println) or -r (show result as value). 
The last expression in a program or any exception value that is not caught will be the return value of the program.
-p will give more detailed output of the result in internal MAFL format. 
-r will show it as the Value type that Rust uses to transfer data to and from MAFL.
If none is specified, it will not print the result at the end and any needed output should be performed via @print statements.
2) the name of the program to run. 
If the name is "-", it will read the whole program from standard input. 
If it is omitted completely, the interpreter enters REPL mode (see next section).

When unit tests are performed, it produces a summary of pass/fail counts.

```bash
$ mafl -r mafl/language.mafl
*** UNIT TESTING ***
# test passed 2 + 3: result 5
# test passed 2 + 3 < 2 * 3
# test passed @test_pass_count: result 2
# test passed @test_fail_count: result 0
*** LET ***
# warning: shadowed x in local context.
*** ASSIGN ***
# test passed x: result 10
...
*** Program result as a value:
true

*** UNIT TEST SUMMARY:
182 passed. 0 failed.
```

If no file name is provided for the program, the interpreter enters into a read-eval-print loop. 
Expressions have to fit on a single line and no editing of previous expressions is possible. 

```
$ mafl
MAFL> 1+1
2
MAFL> let x = 10; let f = fun a { a * 10 };
nil
MAFL> f(x)+5
105
MAFL>
```

## Embedding

The examples folder shows how to embed the MAFL interpreter into a Rust program. It's possible to 
add custom builtin variables and functions to an interpreter instance. Communication is done
through variable bindings and a returned Value type.

In [examples/embed.rs](examples/embed.rs), we pass variable bindings (data) and a custom builtin function (Rust code) to the MAFL program.
We gather the result into a Value type that we extract into Rust variables to be further processed.

Here is the MAFL script that is used by the Rust program. It's an example of using a MAFL script as a "smart" config file for a Rust program.

```
if not(@is_valid_subnet(subnet)) {
    @error("invalid subnet");
}

let name = {
    # if the NAME variable exists in the OS environment, use it for the name
    if (let env_name = @getenv("NAME")) != nil {
        # this exits the current block with a env_name as its value
        exit env_name;
    }
    # otherwise if FILE exists in the OS environment, use it for the file name
    let file = "examples/hostnames.txt";
    if (let env_file = @getenv("FILE")) != nil {
        file = env_file;
    }
    # import 2 functions from the standard library
    from @std.iter use map filter;
    # get names from a file (remove extra whitespace and skip empty lines)
    let names = @lines(@readfile(file)) | map(@trim) | filter(\s{@len(s)>0});
    # grab a name at random
    # last expression in the block is the value of the block
    names[@randint(0,@len(names)-1)]
};

subnet[3] = @randint(100,199);

let port = @randint(port_min, port_max);

# remove 2 variables from the environment
forget port_min port_max;

# we return this object to Rust
module {
    use name subnet port;
}
```

each time the Rust program (embed) is run, it produces different results because our smart config file produces random values:

```
apple.local/192.168.1.190:8115
tomato.local/192.168.1.175:8183
apple.local/192.168.1.142:8192
tomato.local/192.168.1.172:8178
cherry.local/192.168.1.146:8128
tomato.local/192.168.1.134:8113
```

## The parser and types

The parser outputs a parse tree of type ``Syntax``. This syntax is then converted to a runtime expression that can be evaluated. The type used by the evaluator is ``Ptr<Expr>``. ``Ptr`` is an alias for the ``Gc`` smart pointer and ``Expr`` contains ``Ptr<Expr>`` so cycles are possible (that's how recursive functions are represented). After evaluation, we get a simplified ``Value`` type.

In [examples/mafl-parse.rs](examples/mafl-parse.rs), we take the output of the parser on a source file and dump it to JSON. This makes it possible to experiment with interpreters or compilers written in other languages without having to rewrite the parser.

for example, this program

```
let f = fun x y {
    x + y * 10
};

@println(@version);
```

would output the following JSON representation:

```json
{ "syntax": "Block", "value": [ { "block_type": "Sequence"}, [ 
    { "syntax": "Let", "value": [ "f",
        { "syntax": "Fun", "value": [ ["x","y" ],
            { "syntax": "Block", "value": [ { "block_type": "Function" }, [ 
                { "syntax": "BinOpCall", "value": [ { "operator": "Add" },
                    { "syntax": "Variable", "value": "x" },
                    { "syntax": "BinOpCall", "value": [ { "operator": "Mul" }, 
                        { "syntax": "Variable", "value": "y" }, 
                        { "syntax": "Integer", "value": 10 } 
                    ]}
                ]}
            ]]}
        ]}
    ]},
    { "syntax": "FunctionCall", "value": [
        { "syntax": "Builtin", "value": "println" }, 
        [ 
            { "syntax": "Builtin", "value": "version" } 
        ]
    ]},
    { "syntax": "Nil" }
]]}
```

as you can see in the JSON output, the parser annotates each syntax ``Block`` with a tag. The possible values are ``Sequence``, ``Function``, ``Block`` and ``If``. They behave differently regarding scope and exceptions (including break, return, continue). Operators also have a special type. The final ``Nil`` is the return value of the program: normally it's the value of the last expression but this program ends on a statement (with semicolon) so it's implicitly ``Nil``.

## The standard library vs builtin functions and variables

The language provides a series of builtin functions and variables. Their names start with @ (ex: @println). 
They are coded in Rust and receive special treatment by the interpreter: overloading and variable number of arguments are supported but currying is not.
More of these builtins can be added to an interpreter instance from Rust to customize behavior for embedding MAFL.

The language also has a standard library written in MAFL. It is visible as a module named @std.
Individual symbols can be imported into scope (ex: from @std.iter use range map).
A special prelude function can also be used to import a common set of symbols: @std.prelude()

In general, I chose to write the standard library functions in MAFL when it was possible and fun to do so. 
Sometimes, it was necessary to use the host language (Rust) for things like io, random, time.
The @std.builtin module contains MAFL bindings of Rust-based functions (ex: ``let sort_by = fun f x { @sort_by(f,x) }``).
This can be useful when currying is desired. 
@std.math provides function versions of most internal operators (ex: ``let add = fun x y { x + y }``) which makes currying possible (we don't have a special syntax to allow direct currying of internal operators).
The @std.methods module contains bindings that are called on internal types by the interpreter when method calls are used (ex: ``2.exp()``).

By default, no bindings from @std are imported into the user variable space.

At this time, the MAFL standard library resides in [src/std.mafl](src/std.mafl) and is statically included in uncompressed form
inside the Rust binary at compile time. As it grows, this might not be ideal. Comments could be stripped and the text could be compressed.
It could also be pre-parsed to an AST and dumped in binary form.
Having it inside the binary image removes an external dependancy but makes it impossible to change it without recompiling.
It's a tradeoff I decided to make to make things easier (single standalone binary)

If you don't like this, you have 2 options:

1) A cargo compile-time flag named "std_internal" controls this behavior. It's on by default.
If disabled, src/std.mafl is read at runtime instead and can be modified without recompiling.
You still refer to @std as usual but it's loaded at runtime instead of compile time.

2) It's still possible to distribute a copy of this file with the interpreter and load it at runtime with @include even if the internal one is present.
Simply load it into another module and use it when you don't want the internal version. 
You can even mix and match when testing new versions of standard library functions.

```
let my_std = module {
    # we create our own module containing the standard library
    # loaded at runtime.
    @include("src/std.mafl");
};

# use some functions from my_std
from my_std.iter use map range; 
# and use another from the internal copy of @std
from @std.math use add;

map(add(1),range(0,4))
```

## TODO list

Here are a few things that I should work on:

- use ``Serde`` to serialize/deserialize from Rust structures to MAFL types (for easier embedding).
- right now, we have 3 types: ``Syntax``, ``Value`` and ``Expr``. 
``Value`` is used to pass values from Rust and to Rust (it only represents simple data). 
``Expr`` represents the full range of data that the interpreter works with. It represents atomic values, code, closures, references, etc... 
``Expr`` uses ``Gc`` pointers and interior mutability ``GcCell`` almost everywhere. This made it easier to represent potentially-cyclic objects from MAFL. 
Right now, I use ``Box`` for Syntax but convert everything to ``Ptr<Expr>`` (with ``Ptr`` aliased to ``Gc``) for runtime. 
This is certainly overkill but makes everything easier inside the evaluator. 
It would be better to use ``Box`` where ``Gc`` is not necessary.
- improve the display and debug traits for ``Expr``.

Eventually, it would be interesting to see what performance gains can be obtained by
- using bytecode and a stack instead of tree-walking.
- transpiling to another language that is closer to MAFL (functional with gc).
- maybe even producing machine code.

The design of the language probably makes these optimizations difficult (especially dynamic evaluation) and I don't think I will be writing a JIT.

Commit message:

update README with command line options

README.md, after:

# Rust parser and interpreter for the MAFL language

## Why you should not use this language

This project is not meant for production. It's not even meant for any type of productive work. I made it because I wanted to experiment with some Rust crates and needed a good project to motivate me. A scripting language was a good motivator.

There are many much better scripting languages for Rust. Some of them are very solid production-level projects. Use those instead unless you want to play with something a bit weird and different. I recommend ``Lua`` if you want something that is used outside of the Rust world or ``Rhai`` and ``Rune`` if you want a better Rust integration. They have different objectives but they are all much much better than my language.

Note that the current implementation of MAFL is really small: on X86_64, the release binary is less than 3MB stripped with uncompressed standard library embedded and garbage collector enabled. It might be useful in a non-production project if something very small is needed, although I'm pretty sure you can make ``Rhai`` very small too by disabling a lot of features.

## Pest and Nom

I started this project because I wanted to experiment with a ``pest`` grammar after working with ``nom`` for a while. Having the grammar as a separate entity is nice but I also like the ``nom`` approach of combining the grammar with the parsing logic. With ``pest``, changing the grammar often means also having to change your parser code. With ``nom`` they are integrated so you make a single change. When it's possible to change the ``pest`` grammar without having to change the parser code, that's when the separation is interesting (ex: changing the separators in an ``if then else`` statement). In general, a ``pest`` grammar file is easier to read and modify.

## Garbage collector

I wanted to test the ``Gc`` crate for Rust. I usually don't need a garbage collector when working in Rust. ``Rc`` and ``Arc`` are more than enough for my needs most of the time when the borrow checker prevents me from using certain data structures. So I deliberately introduced circular references in my language and made them necessary for certain things by design (it has recursive closures). The garbage collector became essential and I learned a lot by using ``Gc``. My performance took a significant hit so I left it as a cargo feature that is enabled by default. The language can fall back to using ``Rc`` but it will leak memory if you use circular structures.
Dealing with circular references was also very interesting when it came to printing and traversal in general.

## Embeddable functional scripting tool

MAFL can be used to write "smart" config files or scripts for a compiled Rust program. The scripts can call back to the Rust code via custom functions.
Rust can send data into the script and recover a result value or even the full execution context.
As I said before, there are better tools for this, but I wanted my little experiment to support this functionality.
There is still a lot of work to be done at the boundary layer to make passing data to and from Rust more transparent. 
Same with registering custom functions. ``Rhai`` does this very elegantly. In MAFL it's still very clumsy but it works.

## Having fun

I wanted to have some fun while learning about parsing and interpreting a language and also using Rust smart pointers and garbage collection. 
Keeping the language as functional as possible without being purely functional was an important objective because I like the functional aspects of Rust.
Mutability and aliasing are part of MAFL so it's not a pure language and it's certainly not as safe as Rust.

Having fun was more important to me than making a useful language. This means that the design of the MAFL programming language is far from perfect.

Performance is not very good: i'm using a tree-walking interpreter and although I experimented with some performance-enhancing optimizations, that was not my main goal. At some point, I had a caching layer to speed up variable name lookups in one of my experimental branches but it was never integrated fully.

Functions are the main compound type in MAFL. 
They are used to run code but also as objects and modules (via closures). 
The only exception to this is arrays. 
At first, I tried using functions for arrays but decided to have a dedicated type instead.

By default, lexical binding is used. Closures are the main element in the language but the language also supports
special dynamic functions that expand at the call site. It has an @eval builtin that allows the execution
of a string as a program in the current context.

It would probably have been simpler and more efficient to use custom structured types (struct, class, object, etc...) than
to use the closure paradigm for everything. I went for a model that was more fun to work with for me.

In a lot of places in the language, storage cells can be multiply aliased, either by captured environments inside closures or by explicit reference objects.
That's obviously not good practice, especially coming from Rust that forbids multiple mutable borrows, but it was fun to play with and forced the use of runtime smart pointers (``Rc``) and later full gargage collected smart pointers (``Gc``) when cycles were introduced.

Currying is fully supported. That was very important to me. The language uses a declaration style without parentheses but function calls
use parentheses (makes it easier to call zero-argument functions). Function calls can be chained and the language re-arranges the arguments as they need to be consumed.

I enjoy writing code in this language because it's sometimes very challenging given some of the design choices. Once again, fun was a very important part of this project, much more than making something practical. 
If I need to write good code for work with a scripting component, I would almost certainly use something like ``Rhai`` and not MAFL unless I need garbage collected cyclic data.

## Examples

Refer to [mafl/language.mafl](mafl/language.mafl) for a walkthrough of the MAFL language as a long MAFL program.

A first functional example: the fun keyword is used to create closures (lambdas). It can be replaced with a more compact form with backslash.

```
let arr = [1,2,3,4];
let f = fun x xs { 
    @println(
        map(add(2),xs),
        map(flip(div,2),xs)
    ); # 2 results printed
    fold(\x,y{x/2+y*5},x,xs) # no semicolon at end (implicit return from the function)
};
f(10,arr) # no semicolon at end (implicit return from the program)
```
produces the following output:

```
[3, 4, 5, 6] [0.5, 1, 1.5, 2]

*** Program result as a value:
31.25
```

Functions (closures) as objects: cons is a fun that returns its captured state as an object (object factory). 
module is like a zero-arg cons that is called immediately (instance creator).

```
let common = module {
    let x = 10;
};

let builder = cons i1 i2 {
    from common use x;
    let y = i1;
    let z = i2;
    let advance = fun n {
        z = z + y + x;
        x += n;
        y *= n;
    };
    let reset = fun {
        y = i1;
        z = i2;
    };
    let to_string = fun {
        "State(" + x + "," + y + "," + z + ")"
    };
    forget i1 i2;
};

let state1 = builder(1,2);
# at this point state1 is an object containing
# - x: aliased to the x inside common
# - y,z: internal to state1 (values 1 and 2)
# - 3 methods: advance, reset and to_string (called by @println)
# - no i1 or i2 because we forgot them
# but the reset method has captured i1 and i2 in a closure and can use them
# even if the parent forgets them.

let state2 = builder(4,8);
# another instance (with x shared through common)

@println(state1);
@println(state2);

state1.x += 1;

test common.x expect 11;
test state1.x expect 11;
test state2.x expect 11;

@println(state2);
state2.advance(2);
@println(state2);
state2.advance(2);
@println(state2);

test common.x expect 15;
test state1.x expect 15;
test state2.x expect 15;

@println(state1);
@println(state2);

state2.reset();
@println(state1);
@println(state2);
```
produces the following output:

```
State(10,1,2)
State(10,4,8)
# test passed common.x: result 11
# test passed state1.x: result 11
# test passed state2.x: result 11
State(11,4,8)
State(13,8,23)
State(15,16,44)
# test passed common.x: result 15
# test passed state1.x: result 15
# test passed state2.x: result 15
State(15,1,2)
State(15,16,44)
State(15,1,2)
State(15,4,8)
```


A more advanced script example: [mafl/list.mafl](mafl/list.mafl). This one contains a module that implements linked lists using our only object datatype: closures. It really shows how MAFL is different. List nodes (objects) are built out of function closures. A few useful methods are implemented on the returned objects. This example is interesting because it shows how to dynamically construct objects in MAFL with data and methods. It also shows how to use ``forget`` to make functions private.


[mafl/xor_nn.mafl](mafl/xor_nn.mafl) shows how to train a very small neural network. It's probably the last thing you should be doing with a slow language like MAFL. It makes interpreted Python look fast. Some of my experimental branches had optimisations that made this example up to 5x faster. Variable name lookups are very slow in MAFL when not optimized or cached. Since my goal was not high speed for tight loops with math operations, I abandoned the experimental branches. 


## The interpreter

Here is a summary of the interpreter command line options (taken from --help output):

```bash
Usage: mafl [OPTIONS] [PROGRAM] [ARGS]...

Arguments:
  [PROGRAM]  File name of the MAFL program to run (- for stdin). if absent, fall into a REPL
  [ARGS]...  Command line arguments that are passed to the MAFL program via @args

Options:
  -r, --result      Show the result of the program as a Value
  -p, --println     Show the result of the program using @println
  -t, --tests       Print summary of unit tests if any were performed
      --no-prelude  Don't include default prelude in initial environment
  -h, --help        Print help
  -V, --version     Print version
```

```bash
$ mafl -r -t mafl/language.mafl
*** UNIT TESTING ***
# test passed 2 + 3: result 5
# test passed 2 + 3 < 2 * 3
# test passed @test_pass_count: result 2
# test passed @test_fail_count: result 0
*** LET ***
# warning: shadowed x in local context.
*** ASSIGN ***
# test passed x: result 10
...
*** Program result as a value:
true

*** UNIT TEST SUMMARY:
182 passed. 0 failed.
```

If no file name is provided for the program, the interpreter enters into a read-eval-print loop. 
Expressions have to fit on a single line and no editing of previous expressions is possible. 

```
$ mafl
MAFL> 1+1
2
MAFL> let x = 10; let f = fun a { a * 10 };
nil
MAFL> f(x)+5
105
MAFL>
```

## Embedding

The examples folder shows how to embed the MAFL interpreter into a Rust program. It's possible to 
add custom builtin variables and functions to an interpreter instance. Communication is done
through variable bindings and a returned Value type.

In [examples/embed.rs](examples/embed.rs), we pass variable bindings (data) and a custom builtin function (Rust code) to the MAFL program.
We gather the result into a Value type that we extract into Rust variables to be further processed.

Here is the MAFL script that is used by the Rust program. It's an example of using a MAFL script as a "smart" config file for a Rust program.

```
if not(@is_valid_subnet(subnet)) {
    @error("invalid subnet");
}

let name = {
    # if the NAME variable exists in the OS environment, use it for the name
    if (let env_name = @getenv("NAME")) != nil {
        # this exits the current block with a env_name as its value
        exit env_name;
    }
    # otherwise if FILE exists in the OS environment, use it for the file name
    let file = "examples/hostnames.txt";
    if (let env_file = @getenv("FILE")) != nil {
        file = env_file;
    }
    # import 2 functions from the standard library
    from @std.iter use map filter;
    # get names from a file (remove extra whitespace and skip empty lines)
    let names = @lines(@readfile(file)) | map(@trim) | filter(\s{@len(s)>0});
    # grab a name at random
    # last expression in the block is the value of the block
    names[@randint(0,@len(names)-1)]
};

subnet[3] = @randint(100,199);

let port = @randint(port_min, port_max);

# remove 2 variables from the environment
forget port_min port_max;

# we return this object to Rust
module {
    use name subnet port;
}
```

each time the Rust program (embed) is run, it produces different results because our smart config file produces random values:

```
apple.local/192.168.1.190:8115
tomato.local/192.168.1.175:8183
apple.local/192.168.1.142:8192
tomato.local/192.168.1.172:8178
cherry.local/192.168.1.146:8128
tomato.local/192.168.1.134:8113
```

## The parser and types

The parser outputs a parse tree of type ``Syntax``. This syntax is then converted to a runtime expression that can be evaluated. The type used by the evaluator is ``Ptr<Expr>``. ``Ptr`` is an alias for the ``Gc`` smart pointer and ``Expr`` contains ``Ptr<Expr>`` so cycles are possible (that's how recursive functions are represented). After evaluation, we get a simplified ``Value`` type.

In [examples/mafl-parse.rs](examples/mafl-parse.rs), we take the output of the parser on a source file and dump it to JSON. This makes it possible to experiment with interpreters or compilers written in other languages without having to rewrite the parser.

for example, this program

```
let f = fun x y {
    x + y * 10
};

@println(@version);
```

would output the following JSON representation:

```json
{ "syntax": "Block", "value": [ { "block_type": "Sequence"}, [ 
    { "syntax": "Let", "value": [ "f",
        { "syntax": "Fun", "value": [ ["x","y" ],
            { "syntax": "Block", "value": [ { "block_type": "Function" }, [ 
                { "syntax": "BinOpCall", "value": [ { "operator": "Add" },
                    { "syntax": "Variable", "value": "x" },
                    { "syntax": "BinOpCall", "value": [ { "operator": "Mul" }, 
                        { "syntax": "Variable", "value": "y" }, 
                        { "syntax": "Integer", "value": 10 } 
                    ]}
                ]}
            ]]}
        ]}
    ]},
    { "syntax": "FunctionCall", "value": [
        { "syntax": "Builtin", "value": "println" }, 
        [ 
            { "syntax": "Builtin", "value": "version" } 
        ]
    ]},
    { "syntax": "Nil" }
]]}
```

as you can see in the JSON output, the parser annotates each syntax ``Block`` with a tag. The possible values are ``Sequence``, ``Function``, ``Block`` and ``If``. They behave differently regarding scope and exceptions (including break, return, continue). Operators also have a special type. The final ``Nil`` is the return value of the program: normally it's the value of the last expression but this program ends on a statement (with semicolon) so it's implicitly ``Nil``.

## The standard library vs builtin functions and variables

The language provides a series of builtin functions and variables. Their names start with @ (ex: @println). 
They are coded in Rust and receive special treatment by the interpreter: overloading and variable number of arguments are supported but currying is not.
More of these builtins can be added to an interpreter instance from Rust to customize behavior for embedding MAFL.

The language also has a standard library written in MAFL. It is visible as a module named @std.
Individual symbols can be imported into scope (ex: from @std.iter use range map).
A special prelude module contains a common set of symbols and is loaded into the starting context
by the interpreter.

In general, I chose to write the standard library functions in MAFL when it was possible and fun to do so. 
Sometimes, it was necessary to use the host language (Rust) for things like io, random, time.
The @std.builtin module contains MAFL bindings of Rust-based functions (ex: ``let sort_by = fun f x { @sort_by(f,x) }``).
This can be useful when currying is desired. 
@std.math provides function versions of most internal operators (ex: ``let add = fun x y { x + y }``) which makes currying possible (we don't have a special syntax to allow direct currying of internal operators).
The @std.methods module contains bindings that are called on internal types by the interpreter when method calls are used (ex: ``2.exp()``).

At this time, the MAFL standard library resides in [src/std.mafl](src/std.mafl) and is statically included in uncompressed form
inside the Rust binary at compile time. As it grows, this might not be ideal. Comments could be stripped and the text could be compressed.
It could also be pre-parsed to an AST and dumped in binary form.
Having it inside the binary image removes an external dependancy but makes it impossible to change it without recompiling.
It's a tradeoff I decided to make to make things easier (single standalone binary)

If you don't like this, you have 2 options:

1) A cargo compile-time flag named "std_internal" controls this behavior. It's on by default.
If disabled, src/std.mafl is read at runtime instead and can be modified without recompiling.
You still refer to @std as usual but it's loaded at runtime instead of compile time.

2) It's still possible to distribute a copy of this file with the interpreter and load it at runtime with @include even if the internal one is present.
Simply load it into another module and use it when you don't want the internal version. 
You can even mix and match when testing new versions of standard library functions.

```
let my_std = module {
    # we create our own module containing the standard library
    # loaded at runtime.
    @include("src/std.mafl");
};

# use some functions from my_std
from my_std.iter use map range; 
# and use another from the internal copy of @std
from @std.math use add;

map(add(1),range(0,4))
```

## TODO list

Here are a few things that I should work on:

- use ``Serde`` to serialize/deserialize from Rust structures to MAFL types (for easier embedding).
- right now, we have 3 types: ``Syntax``, ``Value`` and ``Expr``. 
``Value`` is used to pass values from Rust and to Rust (it only represents simple data). 
``Expr`` represents the full range of data that the interpreter works with. It represents atomic values, code, closures, references, etc... 
``Expr`` uses ``Gc`` pointers and interior mutability ``GcCell`` almost everywhere. This made it easier to represent potentially-cyclic objects from MAFL. 
Right now, I use ``Box`` for Syntax but convert everything to ``Ptr<Expr>`` (with ``Ptr`` aliased to ``Gc``) for runtime. 
This is certainly overkill but makes everything easier inside the evaluator. 
It would be better to use ``Box`` where ``Gc`` is not necessary.
- improve the display and debug traits for ``Expr``.

Eventually, it would be interesting to see what performance gains can be obtained by
- using bytecode and a stack instead of tree-walking.
- transpiling to another language that is closer to MAFL (functional with gc).
- maybe even producing machine code.

The design of the language probably makes these optimizations difficult (especially dynamic evaluation) and I don't think I will be writing a JIT.
